feat: Proposal for re-designing the AWS KMS keyring (#148)
awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification: proposals/2020-07-01_aws-kms-keyring-redesign/change.md

In the future, new features will be supported without refactoring code or updating customer-facing APIs.
Advanced customers can also follow a similar process for more complex customization.
This lowers the likelihood that advanced customers fork ESDK code.

## Out of Scope

1. Any customer interactions with the ESDK that are unrelated to AWS KMS
2. Keyrings other than the AWS KMS keyring
   1. We rely on the functionality of the [multi-keyring](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/master/framework/multi-keyring.md),
      but the multi-keyring is out of scope/unchanged
3. [AWS KMS asymmetric CMKs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/symm-asymm-concepts.html#asymmetric-cmks)

## Motivation

1. **Move logic out of the AWS KMS keyring** so a single keyring does not handle
   multiple AWS KMS [CMKs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/developerguide/concepts.html#master_keys)
   ([key names](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#key-names)),
   multiple AWS regions,
   or complex functionality (

>    [discovery](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#is-discovery),

Author: Yup! This still interprets properly! Updating here and in background.md. 

For this change, and any suggestions like this below, I'll update them myself since "Add suggestion to batch" doesn't appear to work. Also, in some cases, I have to update both documents so doing it myself ensures I don't forget any changes.

   (see [Reference-level Explanation](#reference-level-explanation)).
   New features are supported by writing operations that configure one or more of these smaller-scoped keyrings.
   These operations also serve as examples, to show customers how we use the basic building blocks for more complex use cases.
   This lowers the risk for one-way doors and makes the customer-facing API easy to use, hard to misuse.
3. **Move AWS SDK client initialization/configuration logic outside of the keyring API runtime**.
   This lowers the potential for keyring API runtime failures.
   There is clear intent/knowledge of _which_ keyring is using _which_ AWS SDK client
   since keyrings are explicitly configured with an AWS SDK client.
   This makes AWS SDK clients easy to use, hard to misuse.
4. **Support additional customer use cases** that cannot be supported today without significant refactors.
   For example, we now support region and key name ordering when _attempting_ decryption.
   For new supported use cases, see [Background](background.md).
   We can continue developing the ESDK with an “easy to use, hard to misuse” mindset.

> ## Drawbacks

Author: Added note on documentation and usage examples.

Also added note to see Background for pseudocode.

## Security Implications

We reduce the API surface area of the current AWS KMS keyring.

[Client suppliers](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#client-supplier)
are removed from the AWS KMS keyring.
This includes client supplier logic for limiting communication to specific AWS regions.
This removes the security decision of _which_ AWS regions a keyring can communicate with
from the keyring’s OnEncrypt/OnDecrypt API runtime.

AWS SDK clients can be shared among different keyrings.
This was already allowed under the client supplier model, and we make this more explicit,
since any shared clients MUST be configured at keyring initialization instead of keyring API runtime.

## Operational Implications

We MUST re-implement the AWS KMS keyring in all languages the ESDK supports.
Existing ESDKs that have released AWS KMS keyrings require a migration/deprecation path.

The [ESDK for C](https://github.com/aws/aws-encryption-sdk-c/blob/aa85ca224d550cfe110e2112821a84506b9aca3e/aws-encryption-sdk-cpp/source/kms_keyring.cpp)
implements the AWS KMS keyring in C++ and returns generic keyring structs.

> The new AWS KMS keyring implementations can be added and the existing keyring implementations can be deprecated.

Author: Sure! I added a note. Here we can just use AWS KMS as well, since it looks like that naming was never updated.

The _AWS KMS discovery keyring_ changes the underlying behavior of the AWS KMS keyring.
It returns the unchanged encryption materials on encryption and _attempts_ to decrypt any encrypted data key,
as long as it can create/initialize an AWS SDK KMS service client (AWS SDK client).

To communicate with AWS KMS, the ESDK’s AWS KMS keyring needs a way to initialize AWS SDK clients.
Current implementations use a [client supplier](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#client-supplier)
that initializes/configures AWS SDK clients.
AWS SDK clients are supplied to the AWS KMS keyring at the keyring’s API runtime.
Client suppliers maintain logic for limiting communication to specific AWS regions and caching AWS SDK clients.

To reduce the scope of the AWS KMS keyring,
we are moving the keyring’s functionality into multiple smaller-scoped keyrings.
These smaller-scoped keyrings are configured by what the document calls _keyring-producing operations_.
Depending on the implementation, keyring-producing operations can be thought of as factory methods/builders.

> They initialize/configure keyrings.

Author: I will work on the wording a bit more - at the very least, I won't have a `/` here. With that said, this kind of depends on the interpretation. If you're implementing this as a builder, you configure a builder with a set of parameters, and then the builder initializes a thing with those parameters (or at least that's how I view it) - you configure the parameters you use the initialize something.

They configure all keyrings required to meet a specific customer use case.
If a use case involves multiple AWS regions or multiple key names,
the keyring-producing operation will initialize a [multi-keyring](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/master/framework/multi-keyring.md)
of smaller-scoped keyrings.

In summary, rather than having a single keyring maintain all AWS KMS logic,
logic is broken up into multiple smaller-scoped keyrings.
Rather than support multiple keys/AWS regions in a single AWS KMS keyring,
we use keyring-producing operations to configure a [multi-keyring](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/master/framework/multi-keyring.md)
of these smaller-scoped keyrings.
The smaller-scoped AWS KMS keyrings become the basic building blocks that keyring-producing operations use to satisfy different customer use cases.

From a customer standpoint, naming will be clearer.
Customers interact with the keyring-producing operations and do not directly interact with the basic building blocks.
However, more advanced customers can directly interact with the smaller-scoped keyrings

> and write their own keyring-producing operations.

Author: That's fair! Updating.

This gives advanced customers more flexibility and reduces the need to fork ESDK code in order to meet a specific use case.

## Reference-level Explanation

### AWS KMS symmetric keyring

**Behavior**

The AWS KMS symmetric keyring MUST...

1. Be configured with a single string identifying an AWS KMS CMK
   ([key name](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#key-names))
   and MUST be configured with a single AWS SDK KMS service client (AWS SDK client) for that key name.
2. Use the key name and AWS SDK client provided at initialization for encryption and decryption.

> 3. Fail on decrypt if the encrypted data key’s provider info does not match the keyring’s configured key name.

Author: Yup. Removing. It's a match for:

"The encrypted data key’s [provider info](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/structures.md#key-provider-information) MUST match the keyring’s configured key name."

   as part of the [AWS KMS Decrypt API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/APIReference/API_Decrypt.html) call.

The AWS KMS symmetric keyring MAY...

1. Be configured with a list of string [grant tokens](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#grant-tokens)
   to be included in all AWS KMS calls.

**Decryption Contract**

1. The keyring MUST have access to an AWS KMS client that is configured with credentials for an AWS principal
   that passes an [AWS KMS Decrypt API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/APIReference/API_Decrypt.html)
   authorization check for the encrypted data key.
2. The encrypted data key’s [provider info](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/structures.md#key-provider-information)
   MUST match the keyring’s configured key name.
3. The encryption context MUST exactly match the encryption context used on encrypt.

> **Initialization**

Reviewer: This section seems entirely redundant w.r.t. the Behaviour section. I'd move the more detailed initialization description into this section. Consider also moving Initialization before Behaviour.

Author: Moving initialization before behavior.

I don't believe (most of) the information is redundant, but I agree having two separate sections is redundant.  Will combine.

On keyring initialization, an AWS KMS symmetric keyring MUST define the following:

- Key Name
- AWS SDK client

On keyring initialization, an AWS KMS symmetric keyring MAY define the following:

- Grant Tokens

### AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring

> Customers MUST declare their intent to use the AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring instead of the AWS KMS symmetric keyring.

Reviewer: I think we need to be more precise about "declare their intent" here. I think what we want is "this MUST be a different keyring" but that's a fuzzy statement. Perhaps just "the keyring-producing operations that produce this kind of keyring MUST be distinct from those that produce non-discovery keyrings"?

Author: I'm leaving this sentence as-is, but adding an additional sentence for further clarification.

**Behavior**

The AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring MUST...

1. Be configured with a single AWS SDK client.
   1. Determine the AWS region associated with the provided AWS SDK client.
      In some implementations,
      this MAY require an additional AWS region argument
      during AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring initialization.
      If the AWS SDK returns the AWS SDK client’s region
      directly from the AWS SDK client
      in an intuitive manner (by using a single function/method call),

>       implementations MUST NOT require an additional AWS region argument.

Reviewer: This will be tricky to strictly enforce, since it could easily be violated if a newer version of the SDK adds this "intuitive manner" under us. We'd have to set up a canary test case that asserts the exact maximum SDK version we depend on, so that it will break and force us to check on every version bump. It also implies a breaking change if this happens, since we then have to remove the parameter and force customers to stop providing it.

I'm not saying we shouldn't do this, but I'd feel better if we checked and found all current SDKs DO support this. Do we have hard evidence this currently isn't possible in any of them? Should we push for all SDKs to?

Author: My understanding is that the Java AWS SDK makes it difficult to obtain the AWS region *after* the AWS SDK client has been initialized.

This wouldn't necessarily be a breaking change. From an implementation standpoint this would likely be...
```
Before:
MakeKeyring(sdkClient, region):
  // Do stuff

After:
MakeKeyring(sdkClient):
  region = GetRegion(sdkClient);
  MakeKeyring(sdkClient, region);

MakeKeyring(sdkClient, region):
  // Do Stuff
```

`MUST NOT require` Does not imply `MAY not provide`, so supporting both is still upholding this behavior.

   as part of the [AWS KMS Decrypt API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/APIReference/API_Decrypt.html) call.

The AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring MAY...

1. Be configured with an AWS account ID.
   1. If an AWS account ID is provided,
      the AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring MUST only decrypt encrypted data keys
      that were encrypted using an AWS KMS CMK in that AWS account, for the keyring’s region.
   2. If no AWS account ID is provided,
      the AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring MUST _attempt_ to decrypt all encrypted data keys in the keyring’s region.
2. Be configured with a list of string [grant tokens](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#grant-tokens)
   to be included in all AWS KMS calls.

**Decryption Contract**

1. The keyring MUST have access to an AWS KMS client that is configured with credentials for an AWS principal
   that passes an [AWS KMS Decrypt API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/kms/latest/APIReference/API_Decrypt.html)
   authorization check for the encrypted data key.
2. The keyring is unable to write a decryption contract,

>    but it MAY fulfill any AWS KMS decryption contract for the configured AWS region and, if provided, the AWS account ID.

Reviewer: I don't think "AWS KMS decryption contract" is ever really defined. It should at least be "AWS KMS symmetric decryption contract". In fact, would it be more accurate and simpler to say "any decryption contract written by an AWS KMS symmetric keyring"?

Author: Fair point. Updating to add clarity.

   1. Fulfilling any AWS KMS decryption contract MUST be sufficient to succeed.

**Initialization**

On keyring initialization, an AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring MUST define the following:

- AWS SDK client (and the AWS SDK client’s region)

On keyring initialization, an AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring MAY define the following:

- AWS account ID
- Grant Tokens

> ### Keyring-Producing Operations

Reviewer: I'm still having trouble with terminology here: we're describing these half as types of keyring with specific configurations and half as an operations that produce keyrings. 

I think we should separate the two things better. It's hard to pick out the right terminology for "kinds" or "types" of keyrings since it's completely implicit in the current specification. I'd suggest we call these "Derived Keyrings" instead, so we're describing the keyrings rather than the operations.

The rest of my comments assume this change.

Author: Leaving this open for now, will address as part of a separate commit (in this PR).

Author: Added term for "derived keyring". I also moved sections around to (hopefully) make things clearer.

**Please note the following names are not finalized.**

> The ESDK MUST provide customers a way to use the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ESDK MUST provide customers a way to initialize the following:
```

Or you could say "MUST provide keyring-producing operations for the following". The concept of "keyring-producing operation" is something we should introduce at a higher level to clarify how that relates to all the Initialization sections.

Author: I already introduce the concept higher up, but will change to initialize here (though I will most likely rephrase this for the "derived keyring" change (or other naming change).

   3. MAY be configured with a list of string [grant tokens](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#grant-tokens)
      to be included in all AWS KMS calls
   4. MUST configure a multi-keyring of AWS KMS symmetric keyrings...
      1. with a single AWS KMS symmetric keyring for each configured key name
      2. with each AWS KMS symmetric keyring configured with the configured grant tokens, if applicable
      3. where the order of the child keyrings matches the order of the configured key names
2. **AWS KMS symmetric multi-region discovery keyring**
   1. MUST be configured with a list of AWS regions
   2. MAY be configured with an AWS account ID
   3. MAY be configured with a list of string [grant tokens](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#grant-tokens)
      to be included in all AWS KMS calls

>    4. MUST configure a multi-keyring of AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyrings...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   4. MUST be implemented as a multi-keyring of AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyrings...
```

Author: Updating.

      1. with a single AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring for each configured AWS region
      2. with each AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring configured with the configured AWS account ID, if applicable
      3. with each AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring configured with the configured grant tokens, if applicable
      4. where the order of the child keyrings matches the order of the configured AWS regions

> **All keyring-producing operations MUST...**

Reviewer: Consider making this something like "The ESDK MUST provide keyring-producing operations for these derived keyrings. All such operations MUST..." Here you really are talking about the operations rather than the end result. All of these last sections should be qualified to refer only to these derived cases, assuming we define "keyring-producing operations" to also apply to initializing the keyring base cases.

Author: I updated the text above the derived keyrings to read "The ESDK MUST provide keyring-producing operations for the following derived keyrings:"

I think leaving "**All keyring-producing operations MUST...**" as-is works best. We...
1. Define what keyring-producing operations are/do earlier in the doc
2. Say which ones we need
3. Say "All keyring-producing operations MUST/MAY/MUST NOT"

1. Initialize/configure the AWS SDK client(s) required for communicating with AWS KMS for the given key names/AWS regions
2. Configure each AWS KMS keyring with the AWS SDK client it needs to communicate with AWS KMS

> 3. Be configurable with an optional AWS SDK client configuration (client config)

Reviewer: Can you link to an example here?

Author: Added...

   (examples include: [Java ClientConfiguration](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-java/v1/developer-guide/section-client-configuration.html), [Python botocore.config](https://botocore.amazonaws.com/v1/documentation/api/latest/reference/config.html), etc.)

   or a similar AWS SDK language-specific client configuration option
   1. If a client config is provided,
      the keyring-producing operation MUST configure all AWS SDK clients with the provided client config
4. Limit the initialization of new AWS SDK client(s) when possible
   1. Multiple keyrings can be configured with the same AWS SDK client if the following conditions are all met:
      1. Keyrings MUST be configured in the same keyring-producing operation call
      2. Keyrings MUST communicate with AWS KMS in the same AWS region
      3. AWS SDK clients MUST share the same AWS SDK client configuration
5. Maintain the order of all key names/AWS regions provided by the customer

**All keyring-producing operations MAY...**

1. Add an identifier to the user agent string in the AWS SDK client
   that was initialized by the keyring-producing operation
   to note the ESDK language and version

**All keyring-producing operations MUST NOT...**

1. Modify any customer-provided client config

> 2. Modify the user agent string if the customer has already provided one

Reviewer: The user agent string is generally a concatenation of separate strings, and the SDKs generally make this an additive process (e.g. https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSJavaSDK/latest/javadoc/com/amazonaws/RequestClientOptions.html#appendUserAgent-java.lang.String-). Assuming the more important requirement of not modifying parameters, do we need this restriction?

Author: Leaving this open. We'll need to have more discussions about this. I do not believe we need to be this restrictive, but this decision may be outside the scope of this PR.

   ([key names](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#key-names)),
   multiple AWS regions,
   or complex functionality
   ([discovery](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#is-discovery),
   limiting communication to specific AWS regions,
   AWS SDK client initialization, etc.).
   The smaller scope of the new keyrings reduces the risk of bugs during both ESDK development and ESDK usage.
   This makes them easy to use, hard to misuse.
2. **Create the basic building blocks for interacting with AWS KMS**
   by creating an AWS KMS symmetric keyring and a separate AWS KMS symmetric region discovery keyring
   (see [Reference-level Explanation](#reference-level-explanation)).
   New features are supported by writing operations that configure one or more of these smaller-scoped keyrings.
   These operations also serve as examples, to show customers how we use the basic building blocks for more complex use cases.

>    This lowers the risk for one-way doors and makes the customer-facing API easy to use, hard to misuse.

Reviewer 2: It also forces us to use our own APIs.

Author: Adding note.

that initializes AWS SDK clients.
AWS SDK clients are supplied to the AWS KMS keyring at the keyring’s API runtime.
Client suppliers maintain logic for limiting communication to specific AWS regions and caching AWS SDK clients.

To reduce the scope of the AWS KMS keyring,
we are moving the keyring’s functionality into multiple smaller-scoped keyrings.
These smaller-scoped keyrings are configured by _keyring-producing operations_.
Depending on the implementation, keyring-producing operations can be thought of as factory methods/builders.
They initialize keyrings.

Keyring-producing operations act as the customer-facing APIs.
Like client suppliers, they initialize AWS SDK clients.
However, AWS SDK clients are now initialized before a keyring is configured.
Keyring-producing operations also handle the load of manually initializing multiple, smaller-scoped keyrings.
They initialize all keyrings required to meet a specific customer use case.
We refer to the keyrings that keyring-producing operations produce as _derived keyrings_.
If a use case involves multiple AWS regions or multiple key names,

> the keyring-producing operation will initialize a [multi-keyring](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/master/framework/multi-keyring.md)

Reviewer 2: I think it should _always_ be a multi-keyring.
Even if there is only 1 thing involved.
These keyring-producing operations MUST identify the generator,
this makes a single multi-keyring different
then a single AWS KMS keyring.
And can cause surprises.

Author: I agree - I'll rephrase to capture this better.

of smaller-scoped keyrings.

In summary, rather than having a single keyring maintain all AWS KMS logic,
logic is broken up into multiple smaller-scoped keyrings.
Rather than support multiple keys/AWS regions in a single AWS KMS keyring,
we use keyring-producing operations to configure a [multi-keyring](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/master/framework/multi-keyring.md)
of these smaller-scoped keyrings.
The smaller-scoped AWS KMS keyrings become the basic building blocks that keyring-producing operations use to satisfy different customer use cases.

From a customer standpoint, naming will be clearer.
Most customers will not directly interact with the basic building blocks
and will only interact with the keyring-producing operations.
However, more advanced customers can directly interact with the smaller-scoped keyrings
and write their own keyring-producing operations.
This gives advanced customers more flexibility and reduces the need to fork ESDK code in order to meet a specific use case.

## Reference-level Explanation

### AWS KMS symmetric keyring

**Initialization**

> On keyring initialization, an AWS KMS symmetric keyring MUST define the following:

Reviewer 2: would "accept" be better than "define" in this case?

Author: Will rephrase. This is in-line with the existing AWS KMS keyring language, but I noticed other keyrings (AES and RSA) say "inputs are REQUIRED" so it looks like we don't actually have a standard for this :(

Will create an issue to standardize this language

Author: Created https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/issues/151

- [Key Name](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-encryption-sdk-specification/blob/dbc17f93100667e28dc54e64d05a625db3e5bac2/framework/kms-keyring.md#key-names)
- AWS SDK KMS service client (AWS SDK client)

> On keyring initialization, an AWS KMS symmetric keyring MAY define the following:

Reviewer 2: Should this MAY stand?
For me the issue is "MAY define",
if it was "MAY receive"...

Author: Will rephrase based on the above.
